PRA Disclosure Statement According to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, no persons are required to respond to a collection of 
information unless it displays a valid OMB control number. The valid OMB control number for this 
information collection is 0938-1279. The expiration date is 12/31/2027. The time required to complete this 
information collection is estimated to be .15 - .3 minutes per data element, including the time to review 
instructions, search existing data resources, gather the data needed, and complete and review the 
information collection. This estimate does not include time for training. If you have comments concerning 
the accuracy of the time estimate(s) or suggestions for improving this form, please write to: CMS, 7500 
Security Boulevard, Attn: PRA Reports Clearance Officer, Mail Stop C4-26-05, Baltimore, Maryland 
21244-1850.  If you have questions or 
concerns regarding where to submit your documents, please contact Annese Abdullah-McLaughlin, National 
Coordinator, Home Health Quality Reporting Program Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.OUTCOME AND ASSESSMENT INFORMATION SET VERSION E1
All ItemsSection AAdministrative InformationM0018. National Provider Identifier (NPI) for the attending physician who has signed the plan of care UK  — Unknown or Not AvailableM0010. CMS Certification NumberM0014. Branch StateM0016. Branch ID NumberM0020. Patient ID NumberM0030. Start of Care Date—— Month          Day            YearM0032. Resumption of Care Date—— NA  — Not ApplicableMonth          Day             YearM0040. Patient Name(First)(MI)                                                        (Last)                                                       (Suffix)M0050. Patient State of ResidenceM0060. Patient ZIP Code- M0064. Social Security Number-- M0063. Medicare Number UK  — Unknown or Not Available NA  — No Medicare NA  — No MedicaidM0065. Medicaid NumberM0069. GenderEnter Code 1.  Male
2.  FemaleM0066. Birth Date—— Month          Day            YearA1005. Ethnicity
Are you of Hispanic, Latino/a, or Spanish origin?  ↓          Check all that applyA.  No, not of Hispanic, Latino/a, or Spanish origin
B.  Yes, Mexican, Mexican American, Chicano/a
C.  Yes, Puerto Rican
D.  Yes, Cuban
E.  Yes, another Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish origin
X.  Patient unable to respond
Y.  Patient declines to respondA1010. Race
What is your race?FilipinoJapanese  ↓           Check all that apply
A.  White
B.  Black or African American
C.  American Indian or Alaska Native
D.  Asian Indian
E.  Chinese
F. 
G. 
H.  Korean
I.  Vietnamese
J.  Other Asian
K.  Native Hawaiian
L.  Guamanian or Chamorro
M.  Samoan
N.  Other Pacific Islander
X.     Patient unable to respond
Y.  Patient declines to respond
Z.  None of the aboveM0150. Current Payment Sources for Home Care  ↓          Check all that apply0.  None; no charge for current services
1.  Medicare (traditional fee-for-service)
2.  Medicare (HMO/managed care/Advantage plan)
3.  Medicaid (traditional fee-for-service)
4.  Medicaid (HMO/managed care)
5.  Worker’s compensation
6.  Title programs (for example, Title III, V, or XX)
7.  Other government (for example, TriCare, VA)
8.  Private insurance
9.  Private HMO/managed care
10.  Self-pay
11.  Other (specify)
UK.  UnknownA1110. Language A.  What is your preferred language?Enter Code B.  Do you need or want an interpreter to communicate with a doctor or health care staff?0.  No
1.  Yes
9.  Unable to determineM0080. Discipline of Person Completing AssessmentEnter 
Code 1.  RN
2.  PT
3.  SLP/ST
4.  OTM0090. Date Assessment Completed—— Month          Day            YearM0100. This Assessment is Currently Being Completed for the Following ReasonEnter 
Code Start/Resumption of Care
1.  Start of care — further visits planned
3.  Resumption of Care (after inpatient stay)
Follow-up
4.  Recertification (follow-up) reassessment
5.  Other follow-up
Transfer to an Inpatient Facility
6.  Transferred to an inpatient facility — patient not discharged from agency
7.  Transferred to an inpatient facility — patient discharged from agency
Discharge from Agency — Not to an Inpatient Facility
8.  Death at home
9.  Discharge from agencyM0906. Discharge/Transfer/Death Date
Enter the date of the discharge, transfer, or death (at home) of the patient.—— Month          Day            YearM0102. Date of Physician-ordered Start of Care (Resumption of Care)
If the physician indicated a specific start of care (resumption of care) date when the patient was referred for home health services, 
record the date specified.——→  Skip to A1250, Transportation, if date enteredMonth          Day            Year NA  — No specific SOC/ROC date ordered by physicianM0104. Date of Referral
Indicate the date that the written or verbal referral for initiation or resumption of care was received by the HHA.—— Month          Day            YearA1250. Transportation (NACHC©)Has lack of transportation kept you from medical appointments, meetings, work, or from getting things needed for daily living?   ↓            Check all that applyA. Yes, it has kept me from medical appointments or from getting my medications
B. Yes, it has kept me from non-medical meetings, appointments, work, or from getting things that I need
C. No
X. Patient unable to respond
Y. Patient declines to respondAdapted from: NACHC© 2019. National Association of Community Health Centers, Inc., Association of Asian Pacific Community 
Adapted from: NACHC© 2019. National Association of Community Health Centers, Inc., Association of Asian Pacific Community 
Health Organizations, Oregon Primary Care Association. PRAPARE and its resources are proprietary information of NACHC and its 
Health Organizations, Oregon Primary Care Association. PRAPARE and its resources are proprietary information of NACHC and its 
partners, intended for use by NACHC, its partners, and authorized recipients. Do not publish, copy, or distribute this information in 
partners, intended for use by NACHC, its partners, and authorized recipients. Do not publish, copy, or distribute this information in 
part or whole without written consent from NACHC.
part or whole without written consent from NACHC.M1000. From which of the following Inpatient Facilities was the patient discharged within the past 14 days?     ↓            Check all that apply1. Long-term nursing facility (NF)
2. Skilled nursing facility (SNF/TCU)
3. Short-stay acute hospital (IPPS)
4. Long-term care hospital (LTCH)
5. Inpatient rehabilitation hospital or unit (IRF)
6. Psychiatric hospital or unit
7.  Other (specify)
NA  Patient was not discharged from an inpatient facility → Skip to B0200, Hearing at SOC,Skip to B1300, Health Literacy at ROC M1005. Inpatient Discharge Date (most recent)—— UK — Unknown or Not AvailableMonth          Day             YearM2301. Emergent Care
At the time of or at any time since the most recent SOC/ROC assessment has the patient utilized a hospital emergency department 
(includes holding/observation status)?Enter Code 0. No  →  Skip to M2410, Inpatient Facility
1.
2.
UK  Unknown  →  Skip to M2410, Inpatient FacilityYes, used hospital emergency department WITHOUT hospital admission
Yes, used hospital emergency department WITH hospital admissionM2310. Reason for Emergent CareFor what reason(s) did the patient seek and/or receive emergent care (with or without hospitalization)?   ↓            Check all that apply1. Improper medication administration, adverse drug reactions, medication side effects, toxicity, anaphylaxis10. Hypo/Hyperglycemia, diabetes out of control
19. Other than above reasons
UK   Reason unknownM2410. To which Inpatient Facility has the patient been admitted?Enter 
Code 1.  Hospital
2.  Rehabilitation facility
3.  Nursing home
4.  Hospice
NA  No inpatient facility admission [Omit “NA” option on TRN]M2420. Discharge Disposition
Where is the patient after discharge from your agency? (Choose only one answer.)Enter 
Code 1. Patient remained in the community (without skilled services from a Medicare Certified HHA or non-institutionalhospice) →  Skip to A2123, Provision of Current Reconciled Medication List to Patient at Discharge2. Patient remained in the community (with skilled services from a Medicare Certified HHA) → Continue to A2121,Provision of Current Reconciled Medication List to Subsequent Provider at Discharge3. Patient transferred to a non-institutional hospice → Continue to A2121, Provision of Current Reconciled Medica-tion List to Subsequent Provider at Discharge4. Unknown because patient moved to a geographic location not served by this agency → Skip to A2123, Provisionof Current Reconciled Medication List to Patient at DischargeUK  Other unknown → Skip to A2123, Provision of Current Reconciled Medication List to Patient at DischargeA2120. Provision of Current Reconciled Medication List to Subsequent Provider at Transfer
At the time of transfer to another provider, did your agency provide the patient’s current reconciled medication list to the subse-
quent provider?Enter 
Code 0.  No   — Current reconciled medication list not provided to the subsequent provider →  Skip to J1800, Any Falls Since SOC/ROC1.  Yes — Current reconciled medication list provided to the subsequent provider→  Continue to A2122, Route of Current Reconciled Medication List Transmission to Subsequent Provider2.  NA — The agency was not made aware of this transfer timely →  Skip to J1800, Any Falls Since SOC/ROCA2121. Provision of Current Reconciled Medication List to Subsequent Provider at Discharge
At the time of discharge to another provider, did your agency provide the patient’s current reconciled medication list to the subse-
quent provider?Enter 
Code 0. No   — Current reconciled medication list not provided to the subsequent provider → Skip to B1300, Health Literacy
1. Yes — Current reconciled medication list provided to the subsequent provider → Continue to A2122, Route ofCurrent Reconciled Medication List Transmission to Subsequent ProviderA2122. Route of Current Reconciled Medication List Transmission to Subsequent ProviderIndicate the route(s) of transmission of the current reconciled medication list to the subsequent provider.Route of TransmissionA.  Electronic Health Record
B.  Health Information Exchange
C.  Verbal (e.g., in-person, telephone, video conferencing)
D.  Paper-based (e.g., fax, copies, printouts)
E.  Other Methods (e.g., texting, email, CDs) ↓            Check all that apply            ↓After completing A2122, Skip to B1300, Health Literacy at DischargeA2123. Provision of Current Reconciled Medication List to Patient at Discharge
At the time of discharge to another provider, did your agency provide the patient’s current reconciled medication list to the         
patient, family, and/or caregiver?Enter Code 0.  No   — Current reconciled medication list not provided to the patient, family, and/or caregiver →  Skip to B1300, Health Literacy1.  Yes — Current reconciled medication list provided to the patient, family, and/or caregiver →  Continue to A2124, Route of Current Reconciled Medication List Transmission to PatientA2124. Route of Current Reconciled Medication List Transmission to PatientIndicate the route(s) of transmission of the current reconciled medication list to the patient, family, and/or caregiver.Route of TransmissionA.  Electronic Health RecordB.  Health Information ExchangeC.  Verbal (e.g., in-person, telephone, video conferencing)D.  Paper-based (e.g., fax, copies, printouts)E.  Other Methods (e.g., texting, email, CDs) ↓            Check all that apply            ↓Section B Hearing, Speech, and VisionB0200. HearingEnter Code Ability to hear (with hearing aid or hearing appliances if normally used)0.  Adequate – no difficulty in normal conversation, social interaction, listening to TV
1.  Minimal difficulty – difficulty in some environments (e.g., when person speaks softly, or setting is noisy)
2.  Moderate difficulty – speaker has to increase volume and speak distinctly
3.  Highly impaired – absence of useful hearingB1000. VisionEnter Code Ability to see in adequate light (with glasses or other visual appliances)0.  Adequate – sees fine detail, such as regular print in newspapers/books
1. 
Impaired – sees large print, but not regular print in newspapers/books
2.  Moderately impaired – limited vision; not able to see newspaper headlines but can identify objects
3.  Highly impaired – object identification in question, but eyes appear to follow objects
4.  Severely impaired – no vision or sees only light, colors, or shapes; eyes do not appear to follow objectsB1300. Health Literacy (From Creative Commons ©)
How often do you need to have someone help you when you read instructions, pamphlets, or other written material from your 
doctor or pharmacy?Enter Code 0.  Never
1.  Rarely
2.  Sometimes
3.  Often
4.  Always
7.  Patient declines to respond
8.  Patient unable to respondThe Single Item Literacy Screener is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial 4.0 International License.
The Single Item Literacy Screener is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial 4.0 International License.Section CCognitive PatternsC0100. Should Brief Interview for Mental Status (C0200-C0500) be Conducted?
Attempt to conduct interview with all patients.Enter Code 0.  No   (patient is rarely/never understood) →  Skip to C1310, Signs and Symptoms of Delirium (from CAM ©)1.  Yes →  Continue to C0200, Repetition of Three WordsBrief Interview for Mental Status (BIMS)C0200. Repetition of Three WordsEnter Code Ask patient: “I am going to say three words for you to remember. Please repeat the words after I have said all 
three. The words are: sock, blue, and bed. Now tell me the three words.”Number of words repeated after first attempt:0.  None
1.  One
2.  Two
3.  ThreeAfter the patient’s first attempt, repeat the words using cues (“sock, something to wear; blue, a color; bed, a 
piece of furniture”). You may repeat the words up to two more times.C0300. Temporal Orientation (Orientation to year, month, and day)Enter Code Enter Code Enter Code Ask patient: “Please tell me what year it is right now.”
A. Able to report correct year
0.  Missed by > 5 years or no answer
1.  Missed by 2-5 years
2.  Missed by 1 year
3.  CorrectAsk patient: “What month are we in right now?”
B. Able to report correct month
0.  Missed by > 1 month or no answer
1.  Missed by 6 days to 1 month 
2.  Accurate within 5 days
Ask patient: “What day of the week is today?”
C. 
Able to report correct day of the week
0. 
1.  CorrectIncorrect or no answerC0400. RecallEnter Code Ask patient: “Let’s go back to an earlier question. What were those three words that I asked you to repeat?”
If unable to remember a word, give cue (something to wear; a color; a piece of furniture) for that word.
A. Able to recall “sock”
0.  No — could not recall
1.  Yes, after cueing (“something to wear”)
2.  Yes, no cue required Enter Code B. Enter Code C. Able to recall “blue”
0.  No — could not recall
1.  Yes, after cueing (“a color”)
2.  Yes, no cue required Able to recall “bed”
0.  No — could not recall
1.  Yes, after cueing (“a piece of furniture”)
2.  Yes, no cue required C0500. BIMS Summary ScoreEnter CodeAdd scores for questions C0200-C0400 and fill in total score (00-15)
Enter 99 if the patient was unable to complete the interviewC1310. Signs and Symptoms of Delirium (from CAM©)Code after completing Brief Interview for Mental Status and reviewing medical record.A.    Acute Onset of Mental Status ChangeEnter Code Is there evidence of an acute change in mental status from the patient’s baseline?0.  No
1.  YesCoding   ↓     Enter codes in boxes0.  Behavior not present1.  Behavior continuously       
present, does not fluctuate2.  Behavior present, fluctuates 
(comes and goes, changes in 
severity)B. Inattention – Did the patient have difficulty focusing attention, for 
example, being easily distractible or having difficulty keeping track 
of what was being said?C.  Disorganized thinking – Was the patient’s thinking disorganized or 
incoherent (rambling or irrelevant conversation, unclear or illogical 
flow of ideas, or unpredictable switching from subject to subject)?D.  Altered level of consciousness — Did the patient have altered level 
of consciousness, as indicated by any of the following criteria?• 
• • • vigilant — startled easily to any sound or touch
lethargic — repeatedly dozed off when being asked questions, 
but responded to voice or touch
stuporous — very difficult to arouse and keep aroused for the 
interview
comatose — could not be arousedAdapted from: Inouye SK, et al. Ann Intern Med. 1990; 113: 941-948. Confusion Assessment Method. Copyright 2003, Hospital Elder 
Adapted from: Inouye SK, et al. Ann Intern Med. 1990; 113: 941-948. Confusion Assessment Method. Copyright 2003, Hospital Elder 
Life Program, LLC. Not to be reproduced without permission.
Life Program, LLC. Not to be reproduced without permission.M1700. Cognitive Functioning
Patient’s current (day of assessment) level of alertness, orientation, comprehension, concentration, and immediate memory for 
simple commands.Enter Code 0.  Alert/oriented, able to focus and shift attention, comprehends and recalls task directions independently.
1.  Requires prompting (cueing, repetition, reminders) only under stressful or unfamiliar conditions.
2.  Requires assistance and some direction in specific situations (for example, on all tasks involving shifting of attention) or consistently requires low stimulus environment due to distractibility.3.  Requires considerable assistance in routine situations. Is not alert and oriented or is unable to shift attention and recall directions more than half the time.4.  Totally dependent due to disturbances such as constant disorientation, coma, persistent vegetative state, or delirium.M1710. When Confused
(Reported or Observed Within the Last 14 Days):Enter Code In new or complex situations only0.  Never
1. 
2.  On awakening or at night only
3.  During the day and evening, but not constantly
4.  Constantly
NA  Patient nonresponsiveM1720. When Anxious
(Reported or Observed Within the Last 14 Days):Enter Code 0.  None of the time
1.  Less than often daily
2.  Daily, but not constantly
3.  All of the time
NA  Patient nonresponsiveSection D MoodD0150. Patient Mood Interview (PHQ-2 to 9)Determine if the patient is rarely/never understood verbally, in writing, or using another method. If rarely/never understood, code 
D0150A1 and  D0150B1 as 9, No response, leave D0150A2 and D0150B2 blank, end the PHQ-2 interview, and leave D0160, Total 
Severity Score blank. Otherwise, say to patient: “Over the last 2 weeks, have you been bothered by any of the following 
problems?”If symptom is present, enter 1 (yes) in column 1, Symptom Presence. 
If yes in column 1, then ask the patient: “About how often have you been bothered by this?” 
Read and show the patient a card with the symptom frequency choices. Indicate response in column 2, Symptom Frequency. 1.  Symptom Presence2.  Symptom Frequency0.  No (enter 0 in column 2)
1.  Yes (enter 0-3 in column 2)
9.  No response (leave column 2 blank)0.  Never or 1 day
1.  2-6 days (several days)
2.  7-11 days (half or more of the days)
3.  12-14 days (nearly every day)1. 
Symptom 
Presence2. 
Symptom 
Frequency↓Enter Scores in Boxes↓A.   Little interest or pleasure in doing thingsB.   Feeling down, depressed, or hopelessIf both D0150A1 and D0150B1 are coded 9, OR both D0150A2 and D0150B2 are coded 0 or 1, END the PHQ interview; otherwise, 
continue.C.  Trouble falling or staying asleep, or sleeping too muchD.  Feeling tired or having little energyE.  Poor appetite or overeatingF. Feeling bad about yourself — or that you are a failure or have let yourself or your family downG.  Trouble concentrating on things, such as reading the newspaper or watching televisionH.  Moving or speaking so slowly that the other people could have noticed. Or the opposite —    being so fidgety or restless that you have been moving around a lot more than usualI. Thoughts that you would be better off dead, or of hurting yourself in some wayCopyright © Pfizer Inc. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission.
Copyright © Pfizer Inc. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission.D0160. Total Severity Score
Enter Score Add scores for all frequency responses in Column 2, Symptom Frequency. Total score must be between 00 and 27. Enter 99 if unable to complete interview (i.e., Symptom Frequency is blank for 3 or more required items)D0700. Social Isolation
How often do you feel lonely or isolated from those around you?Enter Code 0.  Never
1.  Rarely
2.  Sometimes
3.  Often
4.  Always
7.  Patient declines to respond
8.  Patient unable to respondSection EBehaviorM1740. Cognitive, Behavioral, and Psychiatric Symptoms that are demonstrated at least once a week (Reported or Observed):   ↓            Check all that apply1.  Memory deficit: failure to recognize familiar persons/places, inability to recall events of past 24 hours,            significant memory loss so that supervision is required2. Impaired decision-making: failure to perform usual ADLs or IADLs, inability to appropriately stop activities, 
jeopardizes safety through actions3.  Verbal disruption: yelling, threatening, excessive profanity, sexual references, etc.
4.  Physical aggression: aggressive or combative to self and others (for example, hits self, throws objects, punches, dangerous maneuvers with wheelchair or other objects)5.  Disruptive, infantile, or socially inappropriate behavior (excludes verbal actions)
6.  Delusional, hallucinatory, or paranoid behavior
7.  None of the above behaviors demonstratedM1745. Frequency of Disruptive Behavior Symptoms (Reported or Observed):
Any physical, verbal, or other disruptive/dangerous symptoms that are injurious to self or others or jeopardize personal safety.Enter Code 0.  Never
1.  Less than once a month
2.  Once a month
3.  Several times each month
4.  Several times a week
5.  At least dailySection FPreferences for Customary Routine and ActivitiesM1100. Patient Living SituationWhich of the following best describes the patient’s residential circumstance and availability of assistance?Availability of AssistanceLiving ArrangementAround the 
ClockRegular 
DaytimeRegular Night-
timeOccasional/
Short-Term 
AssistanceNo Assistance 
Available ↓            Check one box only           ↓A.  Patient lives aloneB.  Patient lives with other     
person(s) in the homeC.  Patient lives in congregate 
situation (for example,        
assisted living, residential 
care home) 01 06 11 02 07 12 03 08 13 04 09 14 05 10 15SOC/ROCM2102. Types and Sources of Assistance
Determine the ability and willingness of non-agency caregivers (such as family members, friends, or privately paid caregivers) to 
provide assistance for the following activities, if assistance is needed. Excludes all care by your agency staff.Enter Code f. Supervision and safety (due to cognitive impairment)
0.  No assistance needed — patient is independent or does not have needs in this area
1.  Non-agency caregiver(s) currently provide assistance
2.  Non-agency caregiver(s) need training/supportive services to provide assistance
3.  Non-agency caregiver(s) are not likely to provide assistance OR it is unclear if they will provide assistance4.  Assistance needed, but no non-agency caregiver(s) availableDischargeM2102. Types and Sources of Assistance
Determine the ability and willingness of non-agency caregivers (such as family members, friends, or privately paid caregivers) to 
provide assistance for the following activities, if assistance is needed. Excludes all care by your agency staff.Enter Code a.  ADL assistance (for example, transfer/ambulation, bathing, dressing, toileting, eating/feeding)
0.  No assistance needed — patient is independent or does not have needs in this area
1.  Non-agency caregiver(s) currently provide assistance
2.  Non-agency caregiver(s) need training/supportive services to provide assistance
3.  Non-agency caregiver(s) are not likely to provide assistance OR it is unclear if they will provide assistanceEnter Code 4.  Assistance needed, but no non-agency caregiver(s) available
c.  Medication administration (for example, oral, inhaled, or injectable)0.  No assistance needed — patient is independent or does not have needs in this area
1.  Non-agency caregiver(s) currently provide assistance
2.  Non-agency caregiver(s) need training/supportive services to provide assistance
3.  Non-agency caregiver(s) are not likely to provide assistance OR it is unclear if they will provide assistance4.  Assistance needed, but no non-agency caregiver(s) availableEnter Code d.  Medical procedures/treatments (for example, changing wound dressing, home exercise program)0.  No assistance needed — patient is independent or does not have needs in this area
1.  Non-agency caregiver(s) currently provide assistance
2.  Non-agency caregiver(s) need training/supportive services to provide assistance
3.  Non-agency caregiver(s) are not likely to provide assistance OR it is unclear if they will provide Enter Code f. assistance4.  Assistance needed, but no non-agency caregiver(s) available
Supervision and safety (due to cognitive impairment)
0.  No assistance needed — patient is independent or does not have needs in this area
1.  Non-agency caregiver(s) currently provide assistance
2.  Non-agency caregiver(s) need training/supportive services to provide assistance
3.  Non-agency caregiver(s) are not likely to provide assistance OR it is unclear if they will provide assistance4.  Assistance needed, but no non-agency caregiver(s) availableSection G Functional StatusM1800. Grooming
Current ability to tend safely to personal hygiene needs (specifically: washing face and hands, hair care, shaving or make up, teeth 
or denture care, or fingernail care).Enter Code 0.  Able to groom self unaided, with or without the use of assistive devices or adapted methods.
1.  Grooming utensils must be placed within reach before able to complete grooming activities.
2.  Someone must assist the patient to groom self.
3.  Patient depends entirely upon someone else for grooming needs.M1810. Current Ability to Dress Upper Body safely (with or without dressing aids) including undergarments, pullovers,  
front-opening shirts and blouses, managing zippers, buttons, and snaps.Enter Code 0.  Able to get clothes out of closets and drawers, put them on and remove them from the upper body without assistance.1.  Able to dress upper body without assistance if clothing is laid out or handed to the patient.
2.  Someone must help the patient put on upper body clothing.
3.  Patient depends entirely upon another person to dress the upper body.M1820. Current Ability to Dress Lower Body safely (with or without dressing aids) including undergarments, slacks, socks or        
nylons, shoes.Enter Code 0.  Able to obtain, put on, and remove clothing and shoes without assistance.
1.  Able to dress lower body without assistance if clothing and shoes are laid out or handed to the patient.
2.  Someone must help the patient put on undergarments, slacks, socks or nylons, and shoes.
3.  Patient depends entirely upon another person to dress lower body.M1830. Bathing
Current ability to wash entire body safely. Excludes grooming (washing face, washing hands, and shampooing hair).Enter Code 0.  Able to bathe self in shower or tub independently, including getting in and out of tub/shower.
1.  With the use of devices, is able to bathe self in shower or tub independently, including getting in and out of the tub/shower.2.  Able to bathe in shower or tub with the intermittent assistance of another person:a. 
b. 
c. for intermittent supervision or encouragement or reminders, OR
to get in and out of the shower or tub, OR
for washing difficult to reach areas.3.  Able to participate in bathing self in shower or tub, but requires presence of another person throughout the bath for assistance or supervision.4.  Unable to use the shower or tub, but able to bathe self independently with or without the use of devices at the sink, in chair, or on commode.5.  Unable to use the shower or tub, but able to participate in bathing self in bed, at the sink, in bedside chair, or on commode, with the assistance or supervision of another person.6.  Unable to participate effectively in bathing and is bathed totally by another person.M1840. Toilet Transferring 
Current ability to get to and from the toilet or bedside commode safely and transfer on and off toilet/commode.Enter Code 0.  Able to get to and from the toilet and transfer independently with or without a device.
1.  When reminded, assisted, or supervised by another person, able to get to and from the toilet and transfer.
2.  Unable to get to and from the toilet but is able to use a bedside commode (with or without assistance).
3.  Unable to get to and from the toilet or bedside commode but is able to use a bedpan/urinal independently.
Is totally dependent in toileting.4. M1845. Toileting Hygiene 
Current ability to maintain perineal hygiene safely, adjust clothes and/or incontinence pads before and after using toilet,            
commode, bedpan, urinal. If managing ostomy, includes cleaning area around stoma, but not managing equipment.Enter Code 0.  Able to manage toileting hygiene and clothing management without assistance.
1.  Able to manage toileting hygiene and clothing management without assistance if supplies/implements are laid out for the patient.2.  Someone must help the patient to maintain toileting hygiene and/or adjust clothing.
3.  Patient depends entirely upon another person to maintain toileting hygiene.M1850. Transferring
Current ability to move safely from bed to chair, or ability to turn and position self in bed if patient is bedfast.Enter Code 0.  Able to independently transfer.
1.  Able to transfer with minimal human assistance or with use of an assistive device.
2.  Able to bear weight and pivot during the transfer process but unable to transfer self.
3.  Unable to transfer self and is unable to bear weight or pivot when transferred by another person.
4.  Bedfast, unable to transfer but is able to turn and position self in bed.
5.  Bedfast, unable to transfer and is unable to turn and position self.M1860. Ambulation/Locomotion
Current ability to walk safely, once in a standing position, or use a wheelchair, once in a seated position, on a variety of surfaces.Enter Code 0.  Able to independently walk on even and uneven surfaces and negotiate stairs with or without railings (specifically: needs no human assistance or assistive device).1.  With the use of a one-handed device (for example, cane, single crutch, hemi-walker), able to independently walk on even and uneven surfaces and negotiate stairs with or without railings.2.  Requires use of a two-handed device (for example, walker or crutches) to walk alone on a level surface and/or requires human supervision or assistance to negotiate stairs or steps or uneven surfaces.3.  Able to walk only with the supervision or assistance of another person at all times.
4.  Chairfast, unable to ambulate but is able to wheel self independently.
5.  Chairfast, unable to ambulate and is unable to wheel self.
6.  Bedfast, unable to ambulate or be up in a chair.Section GG Functional AbilitiesGG0100. Prior Functioning: Everyday ActivitiesIndicate the patient’s usual ability with everyday activities prior to the current illness, exacerbation, or injury.           ↓    Enter code in boxesCoding:
3. Independent – Patient completed all the activities by 
themself, with or without an assistive device, with no 
assistance from a helper.2.  Needed Some Help – Patient needed partial assistance from another person to complete any activities.
1.  Dependent – A helper completed all the activities for the patient.8.  Unknown
9.  Not ApplicableA.  Self Care: Code the patient’s need B. for assistance with bathing, dressing, 
using the toilet, and eating prior to 
the current illness, exacerbation, or 
injury.Indoor Mobility (Ambulation): Code 
the patient’s need for assistance with 
walking from room to room (with or 
without a device such as cane, crutch 
or walker) prior to the current illness, 
exacerbation, or injury.C.  Stairs: Code the patient’s need for 
assistance with internal or external 
stairs (with or without a device such 
as cane, crutch, or walker) prior to 
the current illness, exacerbation, or 
injury.D.  Functional Cognition: Code the patient’s need for assistance with 
planning regular tasks, such as 
shopping or remembering to take 
medication prior to the 
current illness, exacerbation, or 
injury.GG0110. Prior Device UseIndicate devices and aids used by the patient prior to the current illness, exacerbation, or injury.   ↓            Check all that applyA.  Manual wheelchair
B.  Motorized wheelchair and/or scooter
C.  Mechanical lift
D.  Walker
E.  Orthotics/prosthetics
Z.  None of the aboveSOC/ROCGG0130. Self-CareCode the patient’s usual performance at SOC/ROC for each activity using the 6-point scale. If activity was not attempted at SOC/
ROC, code the reason. Coding: 
Safety and Quality of Performance – If helper assistance is required because patient’s performance is unsafe or of poor quality, 
score according to amount of assistance provided.  
Activities may be completed with or without assistive devices.  Independent – Patient completes the activity by themself with no assistance from a helper.06.
05. Setup or clean-up assistance – Helper sets up or cleans up; patient completes activity. Helper assists only prior to orfollowing the activity.04. Supervision or touching assistance – Helper provides verbal cues and/or touching/steadying and/or contact guard
assistance as patient completes activity. Assistance may be provided throughout the activity or intermittently.
03. Partial/moderate assistance – Helper does LESS THAN HALF the effort. Helper lifts, holds or supports trunk or limbs,but provides less than half the effort.02. Substantial/maximal assistance – Helper does MORE THAN HALF the effort. Helper lifts or holds trunk or limbs andprovides more than half the effort.01. Dependent – Helper does ALL of the effort. Patient does none of the effort to complete the activity. Or, the assistanceof 2 or more helpers is required for the patient to complete the activity.If activity was not attempted, code reason: 07.  Patient refused
09. Not applicable – Not attempted and the patient did not perform this activity prior to the current illness, exacerbationor injury.10. Not attempted due to environmental limitations (e.g., lack of equipment, weather constraints)
88.  Not attempted due to medical conditions or safety concerns1. 
SOC/ROC 
PerformanceEnter Codes 
in Boxes 
↓ A.  Eating: The ability to use suitable utensils to bring food and/or liquid to the mouth and swallow food and/or liquid once the meal is placed before the patient. B.  Oral Hygiene: The ability to use suitable items to clean teeth. Dentures (if applicable): The ability to insert and remove dentures into and from mouth, and manage denture soaking and rinsing with use of equipment. C.  Toileting Hygiene: The ability to maintain perineal hygiene, adjust clothes before and after voiding or having a bowel movement. If managing an ostomy, include wiping the opening but not managing equipment. E.  Shower/bathe self: The ability to bathe self, including washing, rinsing, and drying self (excludes washing of back and hair). Does not include transferring in/out of tub/shower.   F.  Upper body dressing: The ability to dress and undress above the waist; including fasteners, if applicableG.  Lower body dressing: The ability to dress and undress below the waist, including fasteners; does not include footwear.H.  Putting on/taking off footwear: The ability to put on and take off socks and shoes or other footwear that is appropriate for safe mobility; including fasteners, if applicable.Follow-upGG0130. Self-CareCode the patient’s usual performance at Follow-up for each activity using the 6-point scale. If activity was not attempted at         
Follow-up, code the reason.Coding: 
Safety and Quality of Performance – If helper assistance is required because patient’s performance is unsafe or of poor quality, 
score according to amount of assistance provided.  
Activities may be completed with or without assistive devices.  Independent – Patient completes the activity by themself with no assistance from a helper.06.
05. Setup or clean-up assistance – Helper sets up or cleans up; patient completes activity. Helper assists only prior to orfollowing the activity.04. Supervision or touching assistance – Helper provides verbal cues and/or touching/steadying and/or contact guard
assistance as patient completes activity. Assistance may be provided throughout the activity or intermittently.
03. Partial/moderate assistance – Helper does LESS THAN HALF the effort. Helper lifts, holds or supports trunk or limbs,but provides less than half the effort.02. Substantial/maximal assistance – Helper does MORE THAN HALF the effort. Helper lifts or holds trunk or limbs andprovides more than half the effort.01. Dependent – Helper does ALL of the effort. Patient does none of the effort to complete the activity. Or, the assistanceof 2 or more helpers is required for the patient to complete the activity.If activity was not attempted, code reason: 07.  Patient refused
09. Not applicable – Not attempted and the patient did not perform this activity prior to the current illness, exacerbationor injury.10. Not attempted due to environmental limitations (e.g., lack of equipment, weather constraints)
88.  Not attempted due to medical conditions or safety concerns4. 
Follow-up 
PerformanceEnter Codes in 
Boxes 
↓ A.  Eating: The ability to use suitable utensils to bring food and/or liquid to the mouth and swallow food and/or liquid once the meal is placed before the patient. B.  Oral Hygiene: The ability to use suitable items to clean teeth. Dentures (if applicable): The ability to insert and remove dentures into and from mouth, and manage denture soaking and rinsing with use of 
equipment. C.  Toileting Hygiene: The ability to maintain perineal hygiene, adjust clothes before and after voiding or having a bowel movement. If managing an ostomy, include wiping the opening but not managing 
equipment. DischargeGG0130. Self-CareCode the patient’s usual performance at Discharge for each activity using the 6-point scale. If activity was not attempted at Dis-
charge, code the reason.Coding: 
Safety and Quality of Performance – If helper assistance is required because patient’s performance is unsafe or of poor quality, 
score according to amount of assistance provided.  
Activities may be completed with or without assistive devices.  Independent – Patient completes the activity by themself with no assistance from a helper.06.
05. Setup or clean-up assistance – Helper sets up or cleans up; patient completes activity. Helper assists only prior to orfollowing the activity.04. Supervision or touching assistance – Helper provides verbal cues and/or touching/steadying and/or contact guard
assistance as patient completes activity. Assistance may be provided throughout the activity or intermittently.
03. Partial/moderate assistance – Helper does LESS THAN HALF the effort. Helper lifts, holds or supports trunk or limbs,but provides less than half the effort.02. Substantial/maximal assistance – Helper does MORE THAN HALF the effort. Helper lifts or holds trunk or limbs andprovides more than half the effort.01. Dependent – Helper does ALL of the effort. Patient does none of the effort to complete the activity. Or, the assistanceof 2 or more helpers is required for the patient to complete the activity.If activity was not attempted, code reason: 07.  Patient refused
09. Not applicable – Not attempted and the patient did not perform this activity prior to the current illness, exacerbationor injury.10. Not attempted due to environmental limitations (e.g., lack of equipment, weather constraints)
88. Not attempted due to medical conditions or safety concerns3. 
Discharge 
PerformanceEnter Codes in 
Boxes 
↓ A.  Eating: The ability to use suitable utensils to bring food and/or liquid to the mouth and swallow food and/or liquid once the meal is placed before the patient. B.  Oral Hygiene: The ability to use suitable items to clean teeth. Dentures (if applicable): The ability to insert and remove dentures into and from mouth, and manage denture soaking and rinsing with use of 
equipment. C.  Toileting Hygiene: The ability to maintain perineal hygiene, adjust clothes before and after voiding or having a bowel movement. If managing an ostomy, include wiping the opening but not managing 
equipment. E.  Shower/bathe self: The ability to bathe self, including washing, rinsing, and drying self (excludes wash-ing of back and hair). Does not include transferring in/out of tub/shower.  F.  Upper body dressing: The ability to dress and undress above the waist; including fasteners, if applicableG.  Lower body dressing: The ability to dress and undress below the waist, including fasteners; does not include footwear.H.  Putting on/taking off footwear: The ability to put on and take off socks and shoes or other footwear that is appropriate for safe mobility; including fasteners, if applicable.SOC/ROCGG0170. Mobility
Code the patient’s usual performance at SOC/ROC for each activity using the 6-point scale. If activity was not attempted at SOC/
ROC, code the reason. Coding: 
Safety and Quality of Performance – If helper assistance is required because patient’s performance is unsafe or of poor quality, 
score according to amount of assistance provided.  
Activities may be completed with or without assistive devices.  Independent – Patient completes the activity by themself with no assistance from a helper.06.
05. Setup or clean-up assistance – Helper sets up or cleans up; patient completes activity. Helper assists only prior to orfollowing the activity.04. Supervision or touching assistance – Helper provides verbal cues and/or touching/steadying and/or contact guard
assistance as patient completes activity. Assistance may be provided throughout the activity or intermittently.
03. Partial/moderate assistance – Helper does LESS THAN HALF the effort. Helper lifts, holds or supports trunk or limbs,but provides less than half the effort.02. Substantial/maximal assistance – Helper does MORE THAN HALF the effort. Helper lifts or holds trunk or limbs andprovides more than half the effort.01. Dependent – Helper does ALL of the effort. Patient does none of the effort to complete the activity. Or, the assistanceof 2 or more helpers is required for the patient to complete the activity.If activity was not attempted, code reason: 07. Patient refused
09. Not applicable – Not attempted and the patient did not perform this activity prior to the current illness, exacerbationor injury.10. Not attempted due to environmental limitations (e.g., lack of equipment, weather constraints)
88. Not attempted due to medical conditions or safety concerns1. 
SOC/ROC 
PerformanceEnter Codes 
in Boxes 
↓ A.  Roll left and right: The ability to roll from lying on back to left and right side, and return to lying on back on the bed. B.  Sit to lying: The ability to move from sitting on side of bed to lying flat on the bed.C.  Lying to sitting on side of bed: The ability to move from lying on the back to sitting on the side of the bed with no back support.D.  Sit to stand: The ability to come to a standing position from sitting in a chair, wheelchair, or on the side of the bed.E.  Chair/bed-to-chair transfer The ability to transfer to and from a bed to a chair (or wheelchair).F.  Toilet transfer: The ability to get on and off a toilet or commode.G.  Car transfer: The ability to transfer in and out of a car or van on the passenger side. Does not include the ability to open/close door or fasten seat belt.I.  Walk 10 feet: Once standing, the ability to walk at least 10 feet in a room, corridor, or similar space. 
If SOC/ROC performance is coded 07, 09, 10 or 88 →  Skip to GG0170M, 1 step (curb)J.  Walk 50 feet with two turns: Once standing, the ability to walk 50 feet and make two turns.K.  Walk 150 feet: Once standing, the ability to walk at least 150 feet in a corridor or similar space.L.  Walking 10 feet on uneven surfaces: The ability to walk 10 feet on uneven or sloping surfaces (indoor or outdoor), such as turf or gravel.SOC/ROC GG0170. Mobility — Continued1. 
SOC/ROC 
PerformanceEnter Codes 
in Boxes 
↓ M.  1 step (curb): The ability to go up and down a curb or up and down one step. If SOC/ROC performance is coded 07, 09, 10 or 88 → Skip to GG0170P, Picking up object.N.  4 steps: The ability to go up and down four steps with or without a rail. If SOC/ROC performance is coded 07, 09, 10 or 88 →  Skip to GG0170P, Picking up object.O.  12 steps: The ability to go up and down 12 steps with or without a rail.P.  Picking up object: The ability to bend/stoop from a standing position to pick up a small object, such as a spoon, from the floor.Q.  Does patient use wheelchair and/or scooter?0.  No →  Skip to M1600, Urinary Tract Infection1.  Yes →  Continue to GG170R, Wheel 50 feet with two turnsR.  Wheel 50 feet with two turns: Once seated in wheelchair/scooter, the ability to wheel at least 50 feet and make two turns.RR1.  Indicate the type of wheelchair or scooter used1.  Manual2.  MotorizedS.  Wheel 150 feet: Once seated in wheelchair/scooter, the ability to wheel at least 150 feet in a corridor or similar space.SS1.  Indicate the type of wheelchair or scooter used1.  Manual2.  MotorizedFollow-upGG0170. Mobility
Code the patient’s usual performance at Follow-up for each activity using the 6-point scale. If activity was not attempted at Fol-
low-up code the reason.Coding: 
Safety and Quality of Performance – If helper assistance is required because patient’s performance is unsafe or of poor quality, 
score according to amount of assistance provided.  
Activities may be completed with or without assistive devices.  Independent – Patient completes the activity by themself with no assistance from a helper.06.
05. Setup or clean-up assistance – Helper sets up or cleans up; patient completes activity. Helper assists only prior to orfollowing the activity.04. Supervision or touching assistance – Helper provides verbal cues and/or touching/steadying and/or contact guard
assistance as patient completes activity. Assistance may be provided throughout the activity or intermittently.
03. Partial/moderate assistance – Helper does LESS THAN HALF the effort. Helper lifts, holds or supports trunk or limbs,but provides less than half the effort.02. Substantial/maximal assistance – Helper does MORE THAN HALF the effort. Helper lifts or holds trunk or limbs andprovides more than half the effort.01. Dependent – Helper does ALL of the effort. Patient does none of the effort to complete the activity. Or, the assistanceof 2 or more helpers is required for the patient to complete the activity.If activity was not attempted, code reason: 07. Patient refused
09. Not applicable – Not attempted and the patient did not perform this activity prior to the current illness, exacerbationor injury.10. Not attempted due to environmental limitations (e.g., lack of equipment, weather constraints)
88. Not attempted due to medical conditions or safety concerns4. 
Follow-up 
PerformanceEnter Codes in 
Boxes 
↓ A.  Roll left and right: The ability to roll from lying on back to left and right side, and return to lying on back on the bed.B.  Sit to lying: The ability to move from sitting on side of bed to lying flat on the bed.C.  Lying to sitting on side of bed: The ability to move from lying on the back to sitting on the side of the bed with no back support.D.  Sit to stand: The ability to come to a standing position from sitting in a chair, wheelchair, or on the side of the bed.E.  Chair/bed-to-chair transfer: The ability to transfer to and from a bed to a chair (or wheelchair).F.  Toilet transfer: The ability to get on and off a toilet or commodeI.  Walk 10 feet: Once standing, the ability to walk at least 10 feet in a room, corridor, or similar space.
If Follow-up performance is coded 07, 09, 10 or 88 →  Skip to GG0170M, 1 step (curb)J.  Walk 50 feet with two turns: Once standing, the ability to walk 50 feet and make two turns.L.  Walking 10 feet on uneven surfaces: The ability to walk 10 feet on uneven or sloping surfaces (indoor or outdoor), such as turf or gravel.M.  1 step (curb): The ability to go up and down a curb or up and down one step. If Follow-up performance is coded 07, 09, 10 or 88 →  Skip to GG0170Q, Does patient use wheelchair 
and/or scooter?Follow-up GG0170. Mobility — Continued4. 
Follow-up 
PerformanceEnter Codes in 
Boxes 
↓ N.  4 steps: The ability to go up and down four steps with or without a rail. Q.  Does patient use wheelchair and/or scooter?0.  No →  Skip to M1033, Risk of Hospitalization
1.  Yes →  Continue to GG170R, Wheel 50 feet with two turnsR.  Wheel 50 feet with two turns: Once seated in wheelchair/scooter, the ability to wheel at least 50 feet and make two turns.DischargeGG0170. Mobility
Code the patient’s usual performance at Discharge for each activity using the 6-point scale. If activity was not attempted at          
Discharge, code the reason.Coding: 
Safety and Quality of Performance – If helper assistance is required because patient’s performance is unsafe or of poor quality, 
score according to amount of assistance provided.  
Activities may be completed with or without assistive devices.  Independent – Patient completes the activity by themself with no assistance from a helper.06.
05. Setup or clean-up assistance – Helper sets up or cleans up; patient completes activity. Helper assists only prior to orfollowing the activity.04. Supervision or touching assistance – Helper provides verbal cues and/or touching/steadying and/or contact guard
assistance as patient completes activity. Assistance may be provided throughout the activity or intermittently.
03. Partial/moderate assistance – Helper does LESS THAN HALF the effort. Helper lifts, holds or supports trunk or limbs,but provides less than half the effort.02. Substantial/maximal assistance – Helper does MORE THAN HALF the effort. Helper lifts or holds trunk or limbs andprovides more than half the effort.01. Dependent – Helper does ALL of the effort. Patient does none of the effort to complete the activity. Or, the assistanceof 2 or more helpers is required for the patient to complete the activity.If activity was not attempted, code reason: 07.  Patient refused
09. Not applicable – Not attempted and the patient did not perform this activity prior to the current illness, exacerbationor injury.10. Not attempted due to environmental limitations (e.g., lack of equipment, weather constraints)
88. Not attempted due to medical conditions or safety concerns3. Discharge 
PerformanceEnter Codes 
in Boxes 
↓ A.  Roll left and right: The ability to roll from lying on back to left and right side, and return to lying on back on the bed. B.  Sit to lying: The ability to move from sitting on side of bed to lying flat on the bed.C.  Lying to sitting on side of bed: The ability to move from lying on the back to sitting on the side of the bed with no back support.Discharge GG0170. Mobility — ContinuedD.  Sit to stand: The ability to come to a standing position from sitting in a chair, wheelchair, or on the side of the bed.E.  Chair/bed-to-chair transfer: The ability to transfer to and from a bed to a chair (or wheelchair).F.  Toilet transfer: The ability to get on and off a toilet or commode.G.  Car transfer: The ability to transfer in and out of a car or van on the passenger side. Does not include the ability to open/close door or fasten seat belt.I.  Walk 10 feet: Once standing, the ability to walk at least 10 feet in a room, corridor, or similar space. If         Discharge performance is coded 07, 09, 10 or 88 →  Skip to GG0170M, 1 step (curb)J.  Walk 50 feet with two turns: Once standing, the ability to walk 50 feet and make two turns.K.  Walk 150 feet: Once standing, the ability to walk at least 150 feet in a corridor or similar space.L.  Walking 10 feet on uneven surfaces: The ability to walk 10 feet on uneven or sloping surfaces (indoor or outdoor), such as turf or gravel.M.  1 step (curb): The ability to go up and down a curb or up and down one step. If Discharge performance is coded 07, 09, 10 or 88 →  Skip to Skip to GG0170P, Picking up object.N.  4 steps: The ability to go up and down four steps with or without a rail. If Discharge performance is coded 07, 09, 10 or 88 →  Skip to GG0170P, Picking up object.O.  12 steps: The ability to go up and down 12 steps with or without a rail.P.  Picking up object: The ability to bend/stoop from a standing position to pick up a small object, such as a spoon, from the floor.Q.  Does patient use wheelchair and/or scooter?0.  No →  Skip to M1600, Urinary Tract Infection1.  Yes →  Continue to GG170R, Wheel 50 feet with two turnsR.  Wheel 50 feet with two turns: Once seated in wheelchair/scooter, the ability to wheel at least 50 feet and make two turns.RR1.  Indicate the type of wheelchair or scooter used1.  Manual2.  MotorizedS.  Wheel 150 feet: Once seated in wheelchair/scooter, the ability to wheel at least 150 feet in a corridor or similar space.SS1.  Indicate the type of wheelchair or scooter used1.  Manual2.  MotorizedSection H Bladder and BowelM1600. Has this patient been treated for a Urinary Tract Infection in the past 14 days?Enter Code 0.  No
1.  Yes
NA  Patient on prophylactic treatment
UK  Unknown [Omit “UK” option on DC]M1610. Urinary Incontinence or Urinary Catheter PresenceEnter Code 0.  No incontinence or catheter (includes anuria or ostomy for urinary drainage)
1.  Patient is incontinent
2.  Patient requires a urinary catheter (specifically: external, indwelling, intermittent, or suprapubic)M1620. Bowel Incontinence FrequencyEnter Code 0.  Very rarely or never has bowel incontinence
1.  Less than once weekly
2.  One to three times weekly
3.  Four to six times weekly
4.  On a daily basis
5.  More often than once daily
NA  Patient has ostomy for bowel elimination
UK  Unknown [Omit “UK” option on DC]M1630. Ostomy for Bowel Elimination
Does this patient have an ostomy for bowel elimination that (within the last 14 days): a) was related to an inpatient facility stay; or 
b) necessitated a change in medical or treatment regimen?Enter Code 0.  Patient does not have an ostomy for bowel elimination.
1.  Patient’s ostomy was not related to an inpatient stay and did not necessitate change in medical or treatment regimen.2.  The ostomy was related to an inpatient stay or did necessitate change in medical or treatment regimen.Section IActive DiagnosesM1021. Primary Diagnosis & M1023. Other DiagnosesColumn 1Column 2Diagnoses (Sequencing of diagnoses should reflect the serious-
ness of each condition and support the disciplines and services 
provided)ICD-10-CM and symptom control rating for each condition. Note 
that the sequencing of these ratings may not match the se-
quencing of the diagnosesM1021. Primary Diagnosisa.  ____________________________________________M1023. Other Diagnosesb.  ____________________________________________c.  ____________________________________________d.  ____________________________________________e.  ____________________________________________f. ____________________________________________a. b. c. d. e. f. V, W, X, Y codes NOT allowed   0      1       2       3       4All ICD-10-CM codes allowed   0      1       2       3       4   0      1       2       3       4   0      1       2       3       4   0      1       2       3       4   0      1       2       3       4M1028. Active Diagnoses – Comorbidities and Co-existing Conditions   ↓            Check all that apply1.  Peripheral Vascular Disease (PVD) or Peripheral Arterial Disease (PAD)
2.  Diabetes Mellitus (DM)
3.  None of the aboveSection JHealth ConditionsM1033. Risk for HospitalizationWhich of the following signs or symptoms characterize this patient as at risk for hospitalization?   ↓            Check all that apply1.  History of falls (2 or more falls — or any fall with an injury — in the past 12 months)
2.  Unintentional weight loss of a total of 10 pounds or more in the last 12 months
3.  Multiple hospitalizations (2 or more) in the past 6 months
4.  Multiple emergency department visits (2 or more) in the past 6 months
5.  Decline in mental, emotional, or behavioral status in the past 3 months
6.  Reported or observed history of difficulty complying with any medical instructions (for example, medica-tions, diet, exercise) in the past 3 months7.  Currently taking 5 or more medications
8.  Currently reports exhaustion
9.  Other risk(s) not listed in 1-8
10.  None of the aboveJ0510. Pain Effect on SleepEnter Code Ask patient: “Over the past 5 days, how much of the time has pain made it hard for you to sleep at night?”
0.  Does not apply — I have not had any pain or hurting in the past 5 days →  Skip to M1400, Short of Breath at SOC/ROC; Skip to J1800, Any Falls Since SOC/ROC at DC1.  Rarely or not at all
2.  Occasionally
3.  Frequently
4.  Almost constantly
8.  Unable to answerJ0520. Pain Interference with Therapy ActivitiesEnter Code Ask patient: “Over the past 5 days, how often have you limited your participation in rehabilitation therapy 
sessions due to pain?”0.  Does not apply — I have not received rehabilitation therapy in the past 5 days
1.  Rarely or not at all
2.  Occasionally
3.  Frequently
4.  Almost constantly
8.  Unable to answerJ0530. Pain Interference with Day-to-Day ActivitiesEnter Code Ask patient: “Over the past 5 days, how often you have limited your day-to-day activities (excluding 
rehabilitation therapy sessions) because of pain?”1.  Rarely or not at all
2.  Occasionally
3.  Frequently
4.  Almost constantly
8.  Unable to answerJ1800. Any Falls Since SOC/ROC, whichever is more recentEnter Code Has the patient had any falls since SOC/ROC, whichever is more recent?0.  No →  Skip to M1400, Short of Breath at DC; Skip to M2005, Medication Intervention at TRN and DAH
1.  Yes →  Continue to J1900, Number of Falls Since SOC/ROCJ1900. Number of Falls Since SOC/ROC, whichever is more recent    ↓    Enter code in boxesCoding:0.  None
1.  One
2.  Two or moreA.  No injury: No evidence of any injury is noted on physical assessment by the nurse or primary care clinician; no complaints of pain or injury by the 
patient; no change in the patient’s behavior is noted after the fallB. Injury (except major): Skin tears, abrasions, lacerations, superficial bruises, 
hematomas, and sprains; or any fall-related injury that causes the patient to 
complain of painC.  Major injury: Bone fractures, joint dislocations, closed head injuries with altered consciousness, subdural hematomaEnter Code M1400. When is the patient dyspneic or noticeably Short of Breath?
0.  Patient is not short of breath
1.  When walking more than 20 feet, climbing stairs
2.  With moderate exertion (for example, while dressing, using commode or bedpan, walking distances less than 20 feet)3.  With minimal exertion (for example, while eating, talking, or performing other ADLs) or with agitation
4.  At rest (during day or night)Section KSwallowing/Nutritional StatusM1060. Height and Weight — While measuring, if the number is X.1-X.4 round down; X.5 or greater round up.A.  Height (in inches). Record most recent height measure since the most recent SOC/ROCinchespoundsSOC/ROCB.  Weight (in pounds). Base weight on most recent measure in last 30 days; measure weight consistently, according to standard agency practice (for example, in a.m. after voiding, before meal, with shoes off, etc.)K0520. Nutritional Approaches1.  On AdmissionCheck all of the nutritional approaches that apply on admissionA.  Parenteral/IV feedingB.  Feeding tube (e.g., nasogastric or abdominal (PEG))C.  Mechanically altered diet — require change in texture of food or liquids (e.g., pureed food, thickened liquids)D.  Therapeutic diet (e.g., low salt, diabetic, low cholesterol)Z.  None of the above1.
On Admission     Check all that apply     ↓DischargeK0520. Nutritional Approaches4.  Last 7 daysCheck all of the nutritional approaches that were received 
in the last 7 days4.
Last 7 days5.
At discharge5.  At discharge↓         Check all that apply          ↓Check all of the nutritional approaches that were being 
received at dischargeA.  Parenteral/IV feedingB.  Feeding tube (e.g., nasogastric or abdominal (PEG))C.  Mechanically altered diet — require change in texture of 
food or liquids (e.g., pureed food, thickened liquids)
D.  Therapeutic diet (e.g., low salt, diabetic, low cholesterol)Z.  None of the aboveM1870. Feeding or Eating
Current ability to feed self meals and snacks safely. Note: This refers only to the process of eating, chewing, and swallowing, not 
preparing the food to be eaten.Enter Code 0.  Able to independently feed self
1.  Able to feed self independently but requires:a.  meal set-up; OR
b. 
c.  a liquid, pureed, or ground meat diet.intermittent assistance or supervision from another person; OR2.  Unable to feed self and must be assisted or supervised throughout the meal/snack.
3.  Able to take in nutrients orally and receives supplemental nutrients through a nasogastric tube or gastrostomy.4.  Unable to take in nutrients orally and is fed nutrients through a nasogastric tube or gastrostomy.
5.  Unable to take in nutrients orally or by tube feeding.Section M Skin ConditionsM1306. Does this patient have at least one Unhealed Pressure Ulcer/Injury at Stage 2 or Higher or designated as Unstageable? 
(Excludes Stage 1 pressure injuries and all healed pressure ulcers/injuries)Enter Code 0.  No →  Skip to M1322, Current Number of Stage 1 Pressure Injuries at SOC/ROC; Skip to M1324, Stage of Most Problematic Unhealed Pressure Ulcer/Injury that is Stageable at DC1.  YesM1307. The Oldest Stage 2 Pressure Ulcer that is present at discharge: (Excludes healed Stage 2 pressure ulcers)Enter Code 1.  Was present at the most recent SOC/ROC assessment
2.  Developed since the most recent SOC/ROC assessment. Record date pressure ulcer first identified:—— Month          Day            YearNA.  No Stage 2 pressure ulcers are present at dischargeSOC/ROCM1311. Current Number of Unhealed Pressure Ulcers/Injuries at Each Stage
Enter Number  A1.  Stage 2: Partial thickness loss of dermis presenting as a shallow open ulcer with a red or pink wound bed, without slough. May also present as an intact or open/ruptured blister.
Number of Stage 2 pressure ulcersEnter Number  B1.  Stage 3: Full thickness tissue loss. Subcutaneous fat may be visible but bone, tendon, or muscle is not exposed. Slough may be present but does not obscure the depth of tissue loss. May include undermining and 
tunneling.
Number of Stage 3 pressure ulcersEnter Number  C1.  Stage 4: Full thickness tissue loss with exposed bone, tendon, or muscle. Slough or eschar may be present on some parts of the wound bed. Often includes undermining and tunneling.
Number of Stage 4 pressure ulcersEnter Number  D1.  Unstageable: Non-removable dressing/device: Known but not stageable due to non-removable dressing/device
Number of unstageable pressure ulcers/injuries due to non-removable dressing/deviceEnter Number  E1.  Unstageable: Slough and/or eschar: Known but not stageable due to coverage of wound bed by slough and/or eschar
Number of unstageable pressure ulcers due to coverage of wound bed by slough and/or escharEnter Number  F1.  Unstageable: Deep tissue injuryNumber of unstageable pressure injuries presenting as deep tissue injuryDischargeM1311. Current Number of Unhealed Pressure Ulcers/Injuries at Each StageEnter Number A1.  Stage 2: Partial thickness loss of dermis presenting as a shallow open ulcer with a red or pink wound bed, 
without slough. May also present as an intact or open/ruptured blister. 
Number of Stage 2 pressure ulcers  — If 0 → Skip to M1311B1, Stage 3Enter Number A2.  Number of these Stage 2 pressure ulcers that were present at most recent SOC/ROC 
        – enter how many were noted at the time of most recent SOC/ROCEnter Number B1.  Stage 3: Full thickness tissue loss. Subcutaneous fat may be visible but bone, tendon, or muscle is not 
exposed. Slough may be present but does not obscure the depth of tissue loss. May include undermining and 
tunneling.
Number of Stage 3 pressure ulcers  — If 0 → Skip to M1311C1, Stage 4Enter Number B2.  Number of these Stage 3 pressure ulcers that were present at most recent SOC/ROC 
        – enter how many were noted at the time of most recent SOC/ROCEnter Number C1.  Stage 4: Full thickness tissue loss with exposed bone, tendon, or muscle. Slough or eschar may be present on 
some parts of the wound bed. Often includes undermining and tunneling.
Number of Stage 4 pressure ulcers  — If 0 → Skip to M1311D1, Unstageable: Non-removable dressing/deviceEnter Number C2.  Number of these Stage 4 pressure ulcers that were present at most recent SOC/ROC 
        – enter how many were noted at the time of most recent SOC/ROCEnter Number D1.  Unstageable: Non-removable dressing/device: Known but not stageable due to non-removable dressing/
device
Number of unstageable pressure ulcers/injuries due to non-removable dressing/device  — If 0 → Skip to 
M1311E1, Unstageable: Slough and/or escharEnter Number D2.  Number of these unstageable pressure ulcers/injuries that were present at most recent SOC/ROC 
        – enter how many were noted at the time of most recent SOC/ROCEnter Number E1.  Unstageable: Slough and/or eschar: Known but not stageable due to coverage of wound bed by slough and/
or eschar
Number of unstageable pressure ulcers due to coverage of wound bed by slough and/or eschar — If 0 → Skip to 
M1311F1, Unstageable: Deep tissue injuryEnter Number E2.  Number of these unstageable pressure ulcers/injuries that were present at most recent SOC/ROC 
        – enter how many were noted at the time of most recent SOC/ROCEnter Number F1.  Unstageable: Deep tissue injury
Number of unstageable pressure injuries presenting as deep tissue injury — If 0 → Skip to M1324, Stage of Most 
Problematic Unhealed Pressure Ulcer/Injury that is StageableEnter Number F2.  Number of these unstageable pressure injuries that were present at most recent SOC/ROC 
        – enter how many were noted at the time of most recent SOC/ROCM1322. Current Number of Stage 1 Pressure Injuries
Intact skin with non-blanchable redness of a localized area usually over a bony prominence. Darkly pigmented skin may not have a 
visible blanching; in dark skin tones only, it may appear with persistent blue or purple hues.Enter Code  0.  Zero
1.  One
2.  Two
3.  Three
4.  Four or moreM1324. Stage of Most Problematic Unhealed Pressure Ulcer/Injury that is Stageable
Excludes pressure ulcer/injury that cannot be staged due to a non-removable dressing/device, coverage of wound bed by slough 
and/or eschar, or deep tissue injury.Enter Code  1.  Stage 1
2.  Stage 2
3.  Stage 3
4.  Stage 4
NA  Patient has no pressure ulcers/injuries or no stageable pressure ulcers/injuriesM1330. Does this patient have a Stasis Ulcer?
Enter Code  0.  No → Skip to M1340, Surgical Wound1.  Yes, patient has BOTH observable and unobservable stasis ulcers
2.  Yes, patient has observable stasis ulcers ONLY
3.  Yes, patient has unobservable stasis ulcers ONLY (known but not observable due to non-removable dressing/device) → Skip to M1340, Surgical WoundM1332. Current Number of Stasis Ulcer(s) that are ObservableEnter Code  1.  One
2.  Two
3.  Three
4.  Four or moreM1334. Status of Most Problematic Stasis Ulcer that is ObservableEnter Code 1.  Fully granulating
2.  Early/partial granulation
3.  Not healingM1340. Does this patient have a Surgical Wound?
Enter Code  0.  No → Skip to N0415, High-Risk Drug Classes: Use and Indication1.  Yes, patient has at least one observable surgical wound
2.  Surgical wound known but not observable due to non-removable dressing/device → Skip to N0415, High-Risk Drug Classes: Use and IndicationM1342. Status of Most Problematic Surgical Wound that is ObservableEnter Code  0.  Newly epithelialized1.  Fully granulating
2.  Early/partial granulation
3.  Not healingSection N MedicationsSOC/ROC and DischargeN0415. High-Risk Drug Classes: Use and Indication1. 2. Is taking
Check if the patient is taking any medications by pharma-
cological classification, not how it is used, in the following 
classes
Indication noted
If Column 1 is checked, check if there is an indication noted 
for all medications in the drug classA.  AntipsychoticE.  AnticoagulantF.  AntibioticH.  OpioidI.  AntiplateletJ.  Hypoglycemic (including insulin)Z.  None of the above1.
Is Taking2.
Indication Noted↓         Check all that apply          ↓M2001. Drug Regimen Review
Did a complete drug regimen review identify potential clinically significant medication issues?Enter Code 0.  No  — No issues found during review → Skip to M2010, Patient/Caregiver High-Risk Drug Education
1.  Yes — Issues found during review
9.  NA — Patient is not taking any medications→ Skip to O0110, Special Treatments, Procedures, and ProgramsM2003. Medication Follow-up
Did the agency contact a physician (or physician-designee) by midnight of the next calendar day and complete prescribed/           
recommended actions in response to the identified potential clinically significant medication issues?Enter Code 0.  No
1.  YesM2005. Medication Intervention
Did the agency contact and complete physician (or physician-designee) prescribed/recommended actions by midnight of the next 
calendar day each time potential clinically significant medication issues were identified since the SOC/ROC?Enter Code  0.  No  
1.  Yes 
9.  NA — There were no potential clinically significant medication issues identified since SOC/ROC or patient is not taking any medicationsM2010. Patient/Caregiver High-Risk Drug Education
Has the patient/caregiver received instruction on special precautions for all high-risk medications (such as hypoglycemics,             
anticoagulants, etc.) and how and when to report problems that may occur?Enter Code  0.  No  
1.  Yes 
NA  Patient not taking any high-risk drugs OR patient/caregiver fully knowledgeable about special precautions associated with all high-risk medicationsM2020. Management of Oral Medications
Patient’s current ability to prepare and take all oral medications reliably and safely, including administration of the correct 
dosage at the appropriate times/intervals. Excludes injectable and IV medications. (NOTE: This refers to ability, not compliance or   
willingness.)Enter Code 0.  Able to independently take the correct oral medication(s) and proper dosage(s) at the correct times.
1.  Able to take medication(s) at the correct times if:individual dosages are prepared in advance by another person; ORa. 
b.  another person develops a drug diary or chart.2.  Able to take medication(s) at the correct times if given reminders by another person at the appropriate times3.  Unable to take medication unless administered by another person.
NA  No oral medications prescribed.M2030. Management of Injectable Medications
Patient’s current ability to prepare and take all prescribed injectable medications reliably and safely, including administration of the 
correct dosage at the appropriate times/intervals. Excludes IV medications.Enter Code 0.  Able to independently take the correct medication(s) and proper dosage(s) at the correct times.
1.  Able to take injectable medication(s) at the correct times if:individual syringes are prepared in advance by another person; ORa. 
b.  another person develops a drug diary or chart.2.  Able to take medication(s) at the correct times if given reminders by another person based on the frequency of the injection3.  Unable to take injectable medication unless administered by another person.
NA  No injectable medications prescribed.Section O Special Treatment, Procedures, and ProgramsSOC/ROCO0110. Special Treatments, Procedures, and ProgramsCheck all of the following treatments, procedures, and programs that apply on admission.a. On Admission
Check all that apply
↓Cancer Treatments
A1.  ChemotherapyA2.  IV
A3.  Oral
A10.  OtherB1.  RadiationRespiratory Therapies
C1.  Oxygen Therapy
C2.  Continuous
C3.  Intermittent
C4.  High-concentrationD1.  SuctioningD2.  Scheduled
D3.  As Needed
E1.  Tracheostomy care
F1.  Invasive Mechanical Ventilator (ventilator or respirator)
G1. Non-invasive Mechanical VentilatorG2.  BiPAP
G3.  CPAPOther
H1.  IV MedicationsH2.  Vasoactive medications
H3.  Antibiotics
H4.  Anticoagulation
H10. Other
I1.  Transfusions
J1.  DialysisJ2.  Hemodialysis
J3.  Peritoneal dialysisO1.  IV AccessO2.  Peripheral
O3.  Mid-line
O4.  Central (e.g., PICC, tunneled, port)None of the Above
Z1.  None of the AboveDischargeO0110. Special Treatments, Procedures, and ProgramsCheck all of the following treatments, procedures, and programs that apply on discharge.c. At Discharge
Check all that apply
↓Cancer Treatments
A1.  ChemotherapyA2.  IV
A3.  Oral
A10.  OtherB1.  RadiationRespiratory Therapies
C1.  Oxygen Therapy
C2.  Continuous
C3.  Intermittent
C4.  High-concentrationD1.  SuctioningD2.  Scheduled
D3.  As Needed
E1.  Tracheostomy care
F1.  Invasive Mechanical Ventilator (ventilator or respirator)
G1. Non-invasive Mechanical VentilatorG2.  BiPAP
G3.  CPAPOther
H1.  IV MedicationsH2.  Vasoactive medications
H3.  Antibiotics
H4.  Anticoagulation
H10. Other
I1.  Transfusions
J1.  DialysisJ2.  Hemodialysis
J3.  Peritoneal dialysisO1.  IV AccessO2.  Peripheral
O3.  Mid-line
O4.  Central (e.g., PICC, tunneled, port)None of the Above
Z1.  None of the AboveO0350. Patient’s COVID-19 vaccination is up to date.Enter Code 0.  No, patient is not up to date
1.  Yes, patient is up to dateM1041. Influenza Vaccine Data Collection Period
Does this episode of care (SOC/ROC to Transfer/Discharge) include any dates on or between October 1 and March 31?Enter Code 0.  No → Skip to M2401, Intervention Synopsis
1.  Yes → Continue to M1046, Influenza Vaccine ReceivedM1046. Influenza Vaccine Received
Did the patient receive the influenza vaccine for this year’s flu season?Enter Code Yes; received from your agency during this episode of care (SOC/ROC to Transfer/Discharge)
Yes; received from your agency during a prior episode of care (SOC/ROC to Transfer/Discharge)
Yes; received from another health care provider (for example, physician, pharmacist)1.
2.
3.
4. No; patient offered and declined
5. No; patient assessed and determined to have medical contraindication(s)
6. No; not indicated – patient does not meet age/condition guidelines for influenza vaccine
7. No; inability to obtain vaccine due to declared shortage
8. No; patient did not receive the vaccine due to reasons other than those listed in responses 4-7.Section Q Participation in Assessment and Goal SettingM2401. Intervention Synopsis
At the time of or at any time since the most recent SOC/ROC assessment, were the following interventions BOTH included in the 
physician-ordered plan of care AND implemented? (Mark only one box in each row.)Plan/InterventionNoYesNot Applicableb.  Falls prevention interventions↓         Check only one box in each row        ↓c.  Depression intervention(s) 
such as medication, referral 
for other treatment, or a 
monitoring plan for current 
treatmentd. Intervention(s) to monitor 
and mitigate paine. Intervention(s) to prevent 
pressure ulcersf. Pressure ulcer treatment 
based on principles of moist 
wound healing 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 NA NA NA NA NAEvery standardized, validated multi-factor 
fall risk assessment conducted at or since 
the most recent SOC/ROC assessment indi-
cates the patient has no risk for falls.Patient has no diagnosis of depression AND 
every standardized, validated depression 
screening conducted at or since the most 
recent SOC/ROC assessment indicates the 
patient has: 1) no symptoms of depression; 
or 2) has some symptoms of depression but 
does not meet criteria for further evaluation 
of depression based on screening tool used.Every standardized, validated pain assess-
ment conducted at or since the most recent 
SOC/ROC assessment indicates the patient 
has no pain.Every standardized, validated pressure ulcer 
risk assessment conducted at or since the 
most recent SOC/ROC assessment indicates 
the patient is not at risk of developing pres-
sure ulcers.Patient has no pressure ulcers OR has no 
pressure ulcers for which moist wound heal-
ing is indicated.